Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it’s part
three of our three-part mini-series
on the making of modern Saudi Arabia.
In case you missed them, part
one was on the man behind it
all, Crown Prince Mohammed Bin
Salman, otherwise known as MBS.
Part two was on the country’s
plan to build a science fiction
city of the future, NEOM.
And today’s episode, part three, will
be on a subject that isn’t so rosy;
the blood-curdling murder of the
Saudi journalist, Jamal Khashoggi.
I need to mention a couple
of things before we start.
Firstly, there will be a few
slightly graphic descriptions in
this episode, so it’s probably not
one to be listening to with young
children or on a delicate stomach.
And secondly, I will be referring to
several events and ideas we talked about
in part one, on Mohammed Bin Salman,
so if you haven’t listened to that one
yet, or you don’t know much about Saudi
Arabia, now might be a good time to
press pause and go and listen to that.
OK then, let’s not waste a
minute, and get right into it.
Consulates are often unusual places.
If you have never spent much time
outside your home country, you will
probably never set foot in one.
They exist as these unusual microcosms
of your home country, transplanted
into the heart of another nation.
In theory, they are there
to serve and protect you.
If you get into trouble in
another country, you get in
touch with the local consulate.
If you need to get some sort
of official documentation–a new
passport, or a replacement birth
certificate–your consulate, or embassy,
is often your first port of call.
And on the 28th of September, 2018,
one Saudi citizen went to his consulate
for exactly this; Jamal Khashoggi
needed an official document proving
that he was divorced, a document he
could show to the Turkish authorities
so that he would be able to get
married to his Turkish fiancée.
Khashoggi was older, at 59
to his fiancée’s 36, and
he wasn’t wasting any time.
The pair had met a few months before,
had hit it off, and had decided to marry.
Khashoggi was, of course, not a
random, unknown Saudi citizen.
He had become a prominent critic
of the Saudi regime, as we’ll
talk about more in a few minutes.
And as such, he was a little cautious
about going into the consulate.
Yes, it was in Istanbul, Turkish soil.
But he knew that setting foot
inside the consulate meant opening
himself up to the Saudi authorities.
And he had plenty of reason to believe
that this was a dangerous thing to do.
So he arrived unannounced, not
informing them of his visit beforehand.
To his surprise, he found the officials
he met there to be welcoming and friendly.
They couldn’t provide the documents
there and then; it would take a
few days for them to contact the
authorities back in Saudi Arabia to
prepare the papers, then he would be
welcome to come back and collect them.
To someone fearing that they would be
handcuffed and forced to board a plane
back to Riyadh, Khashoggi must have
breathed a sigh of relief when he was
shown the exit, and felt the warm, autumn
afternoon Istanbul sunshine on his face.
Little did he know that his visit had
triggered another phone call back to
Riyadh, and would set into motion a
plan involving a bone saw, a forensic
surgeon, and a murder squad with
him as their “sacrificial animal”.
Now, let me return to the man in
question, and why he wasn’t simply
provided with his divorce papers
and allowed to continue his day.
Jamal Khashoggi had not always
been an enemy of the Saudi state.
In fact, for much of his
life, he was part of it.
He was born in Medina in 1958
into a well-connected family.
If you are thinking, I’m sure
I’ve heard the name Khashoggi
here before, you’re right.
His uncle, Adnan Khashoggi, was the
self-declared “richest man in the
world”, and one of the most famous
arms dealers of the twentieth century,
and also the subject of episode
number 466, which is a fun one if
you haven’t listened to it already.
Jamal Khashoggi grew up close to the
Saudi royal court, educated, privileged,
and very much inside the system.
As a young man, he became a journalist,
working for Saudi newspapers and
later serving as editor of some of the
country’s most important publications.
He reported from Afghanistan in the 1980s,
where he met figures like Osama bin Laden.
Now, at the time, this was not unusual.
This was before Bin Laden became a
global pariah, and at a time when Saudi
Arabia, the United States, and Islamist
fighters were all aligned against
a common enemy: the Soviet Union.
And this was a world in which Khashoggi
excelled, a world where politics,
religion and power all melt into one.
So for years, decades even, Khashoggi
was what you might call a loyal insider.
He believed in reform,
but reform from within.
He criticised corruption and incompetence
when he saw it, but he did so carefully,
always aware of where the red lines lay.
Or at least, mostly aware.
He crossed them on several
occasions, and paid the price.
He was fired from editorial
positions more than once, only
to be quietly reinstated later.
But this was how the system worked.
Punishment, forgiveness, and an
understanding that if everyone
played by the rules, well, we
would all get along just fine.
But something changed in the mid 2010s.
When King Salman came to power in
2015, and his young son Mohammed Bin
Salman began his rapid ascent, the
old balancing act started to collapse.
Power was centralised.
Rivals were sidelined.
Critics were no longer
managed; they were silenced.
There was no middle ground; you
were either wholeheartedly with
MBS’s plan for the new Saudi
Arabia, or you were against it.
At first, however, Khashoggi seemed
cautiously optimistic about the
prospect of an MBS-led Saudi Arabia.
He supported some of the early reforms,
the promise of economic diversification,
the talk of a more open society.
After all, this was what he had
spent years quietly advocating for.
But as arrests of clerics,
businessmen, intellectuals, and
activists began to mount, his
optimism turned to disillusionment.
If he had had some hope to be a
sort of regime-friendly critic,
those hopes were soon dashed.
And shortly after the Ritz-Carlton
purge in 2017, he left the country.
But he didn't flee in the middle of
the night, and at first he didn't
even see himself as an exile.
He travelled to the United States,
settled there, and began writing
opinion columns about the Middle
East for The Washington Post.
His columns were measured,
thoughtful, and often restrained.
But he didn’t mince his words; he wasn’t
afraid to call a spade a spade, to speak
out when he believed it was necessary.
He criticised the lack of
free speech in the Arab world.
He condemned the arrests
of peaceful activists.
He warned that Saudi Arabia was
sliding into authoritarianism
under the banner of reform.
For Mohammed Bin Salman, for
MBS, this was intolerable.
Here was a man who knew the system,
who spoke its language, who could
not easily be dismissed as a foreign
agent or an Islamist extremist.
He was a court insider.
And worse still, he was listened to.
In Washington, in Europe, in
the very capitals whose support
the Crown Prince needed.
And that’s before considering
his almost 2 million Twitter
followers, most of whom were Saudis.
Khashoggi’s was clearly a
voice that couldn't be ignored.
Saudi officials began contacting him.
Some urged him to come home,
promising him that there would be a
place for him in MBS’s inner circle.
Others warned him, less
subtly, to be careful.
Friends told him his name was being
discussed at the highest levels.
Khashoggi understood the risks, but he
believed he had a degree of protection.
He was well-known.
He lived in the United States.
He was a high-profile columnist for
a newspaper owned by Jeff Bezos,
the founder of Amazon, and someone
who MBS was actively trying to woo.
And after all, he was not calling for
revolution, for MBS to step down or for
the Saudi royal family to be overthrown;
he was just asking for some reform.
And by the autumn of 2018,
on a personal level, he was
starting a new chapter of life.
He was in love.
He was about to get married.
He was thinking about the future.
And so, on the 2nd of October, a
few days after that reassuring first
visit, Jamal Khashoggi returned to
the Saudi consulate in Istanbul.
He handed his phones to his fiancée.
He knew that they would be taken off
him when he entered the building, and
any half-decent professional could get
into them and unearth the details of
his communications with journalists and
activists both in Saudi Arabia and abroad.
No, he would go in with the
absolute minimum, he told her.
If she sensed that anything was
wrong, he instructed her to call
Yasin Aktay, a Turkish friend and
journalist, and a close confidant of
the Turkish president, Tayyip Erdoğan.
At 14 minutes past 1, on the 2nd of
October, 2018, he walked into the Saudi
Consulate, expecting some paperwork.
As you will probably
know, he never walked out.
A few days before his arrival,
preparations had been made for
what would go down as one of the
most brazen assassinations of
a dissident in recent history.
The Saudi authorities, perfectly
reasonably, didn’t particularly
trust their Turkish counterparts,
and in preparation, had thoroughly
swept the consulate for bugs,
hidden cameras, and so on.
They then instructed all the regular
staff at the consulate to go home that
day – you’ve got the day off, enjoy it.
That day, the consulate was going to be
staffed by some “special guests”, men
who had flown over on two Gulfstream
jets from Riyadh, jets that were owned
by the country’s sovereign wealth fund.
On board was a squad of 15 agents,
including intelligence officers, MBS’s
close security detail, and a forensic
doctor from the Saudi Interior Ministry.
They were inside the consulate,
waiting for Khashoggi to arrive.
And if you are wondering how this is
public information, well, I said that
the consulate had been thoroughly
swept for bugs, but it seems that it
hadn’t been swept that thoroughly.
There were several secret listening
devices the Turkish authorities had
placed inside the consulate that
the Saudis didn’t find, and they
recorded everything that happened.
And I’m sorry to say that this
is the part where we have to
go into some grisly detail.
As Khashoggi was about to arrive,
one of the agents in charge of the
operation asked another whether the
“sacrificial animal” had arrived yet.
When he did arrive, he was
taken to an upstairs room,
and things quickly escalated.
Khashoggi was told there was an Interpol
order for his arrest, and he would need
to be brought back to Saudi Arabia.
Khashoggi asked if he was being
kidnapped, then one of the
agents brought out a syringe.
Khashoggi's voice became agitated, and he
asked whether he was going to be drugged.
This was at 1.33 pm, and it was the last
thing anyone heard Jamal Khashoggi say.
It’s thought that he was
suffocated with a plastic bag.
And then the forensic surgeon was
put to work, firing up his bone saw
and cutting up the body of Saudi
Arabia’s most famous dissident.
There are differing opinions as
to whether Khashoggi was actually
dead when the dismembering started.
He was certainly dead when it finished.
Shortly afterwards, a Saudi agent was
pictured leaving the consulate, dressed
up in Khashoggi’s clothes, complete with
his hat and a fake little goatee beard.
He went to the famous Blue Mosque,
before slipping into the bathroom,
changing back into his own
clothes and dumping Khashoggi’s.
As to what happened to Khashoggi’s
body, there are only a handful
of people who know the truth.
Some commentators suggest it was wrapped
in plastic and taken out of the consulate
in bags, others that it was dissolved
in acid in the consulate grounds.
That very afternoon, when her fiancé
failed to come out of the consulate,
Khashoggi’s fiancée, Hatice Cengiz
immediately called Khashoggi’s Turkish
journalist friend, pleading for help.
Fortunately, this friend, Yasin Aktay, was
an aide to President Erdogan, so he was
able to get things moving pretty quickly.
From that moment on, what had
been a private disappearance
became an international crisis.
Within hours, Turkish officials
were quietly alerted that
something was badly wrong.
CCTV footage showed Jamal Khashoggi
entering the consulate, but
there was no sign of him leaving.
And the Turkish police could not
simply walk in and search the building.
Under international law,
consulates are protected spaces,
and entry requires permission
from the country that runs them.
Saudi officials insisted that Khashoggi
had left of his own accord, and that
there was nothing to investigate.
For the first few days, Saudi
Arabia stuck rigidly to this line.
They said Khashoggi had completed
his paperwork and walked out.
Perhaps he might have gone
elsewhere in Istanbul.
Perhaps he had met someone.
Perhaps he had disappeared voluntarily.
It was an implausible story, but
it was repeated again and again
by Saudi officials, almost as if
repetition alone might make it true.
They thought, perhaps perfectly
reasonably, that nobody would
ever know what had happened
in the consulate that day.
Turkey, meanwhile, chose
a different strategy.
Rather than confronting Saudi
Arabia head on, showing its hand,
Turkish authorities began to leak
information, slowly and deliberately.
First came confirmation that a team
of Saudi officials had flown into
Istanbul on the day of the killing.
Then CCTV images of the men
arriving at the airport.
Then hotel records.
Then details of the body double wandering
through the city dressed as Khashoggi.
Each leak added another
crack to the Saudi story.
Turkey never held a press conference
to announce it had recordings
from inside the consulate, nor
did it ever publicly release them.
Instead, in mid-October, it allowed
journalists to report that such recordings
existed, letting Saudi Arabia realise,
slowly and painfully, that every
denial had already been contradicted.
As the days passed, the
pressure intensified.
Journalists, governments, and human
rights groups demanded answers.
Business leaders began to pull out
of Saudi investment conferences.
Western politicians spoke of
consequences, even if many
were careful not to go too far.
The idea that a man, a public figure,
could walk into a consulate and simply
vanish was becoming impossible to ignore.
After more than two weeks of denial,
Saudi Arabia finally changed its story.
On the 20th of October, it admitted
that Jamal Khashoggi was dead.
But the explanation it offered
only raised more questions.
According to the new version,
Khashoggi had died during a rogue
interrogation that had gone wrong.
The operatives involved, Saudi Arabia
said, had acted without authorisation.
Several officials were arrested.
Senior figures were dismissed.
The Crown Prince, it was
stressed, knew nothing about it.
Few people outside the
kingdom believed it.
A spontaneous interrogation doesn’t
normally involve two private jets,
a 15-man team, a forensic surgeon,
and a carefully planned cover story.
Intelligence agencies around the world
came to the same conclusion: this
was not an accident; it was a planned
killing, sponsored by none other than
the Crown Prince, Mohammed Bin Salman.
In the months that followed,
the fallout continued.
The CIA concluded that Mohammed
Bin Salman had almost certainly
approved the operation.
A United Nations investigator described
the murder as an extrajudicial killing
for which the Saudi state was responsible.
In response, Saudi Arabia held secret
trials, sentencing some of the men
involved to prison, while sparing others
who were closer to the centres of power.
The proceedings were widely
dismissed as a whitewash.
And then, gradually, the world…moved on.
Strategic interests reasserted themselves.
Arms deals resumed.
Diplomacy softened.
The United States, under President Trump,
showed no real interest in weighing in.
Global leaders who had once
spoken of pariah status were
photographed shaking hands again.
A few years later, the same CEOs
were back in Riyadh, competing
for lucrative NEOM contracts.
Even Turkey, after years of tension,
eventually transferred the remaining
legal proceedings to Saudi Arabia,
effectively closing the case.
Jamal Khashoggi’s body
was never recovered.
His fiancée never received the
documents he went to collect that day.
And the message sent by his killing
lingered long after the headlines faded.
A warning to critics.
A demonstration of power.
A reminder that, in the new Saudi Arabia,
there were limits to reform, and crossing
them could be fatal: Jamal Khashoggi went
to his consulate to collect a document.
What he exposed instead was the true
cost of dissent in the new Saudi Arabia.
OK, then, that is it for today's episode
on the murder of Jamal Khashoggi,
and with that comes an end to this
three-part mini-series on MBS and
the making of modern Saudi Arabia.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
Saudi Arabia is an increasingly
popular country for this show, so
to the wonderful Saudi listeners, I
would especially like to know what
you thought about this episode,
and of this mini-series in general.
What would you like people to know about
your country, what changes have you seen
in your day-to-day lives, and what are
your hopes and dreams for the future?
The place for that is our community forum,
which is at community.leonardoenglish.com.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.